IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023 4219

A GPU-Accelerated Framework for Path-Based Timing Analysis

Guannan Guo , Tsung-Wei Huang , Member, IEEE, Yibo Lin , Member, IEEE, Zizheng Guo , Sushma Yellapragada, and Martin D. F. Wong, Fellow, IEEE

Fig. 1. Computational tradeoff between runtime and pessimism reduction on path-based timing analysis.

Abstract—As a key routine in static timing analysis (STA), path-based analysis (PBA) plays a very important role in refining the critical path report by reducing excessive slack pessimism. PBA is also well known for its long execution time, which makes it a hot topic for parallel computing in the STA community. However, nearly all of the parallel PBA algorithms are restricted to CPU architectures, which greatly limits their scalability. To achieve a new performance milestone on PBA, we must leverage the high throughput computing in the graphics processing unit (GPU). Therefore, in this work, we propose a new GPU-accelerated PBA framework which contains compact data structures and highly efficient kernels. By integrating with GPU-accelerated preprocessing steps, our framework can also effectively handle extensive critical path constraints. Besides, we highlight many optimization techniques that can overcome the execution bottleneck and further boost the performance. In experiments, we demonstrate 543× speed-up compared to the state-of-the-art PBA algorithm on the design with 1.6 million gates, which outperforms 25×–45× over the state-of-the-art parallel PBA algorithm on 40 CPU cores. A fully optimized framework can achieve 3×–5× speed-up on top of that.

Index Terms—Graphics processing unit (GPU) acceleration, static timing analysis (STA).

I. INTRODUCTION P ATH-BASED analysis (PBA) is a common practice to remove path slack pessimism and obtain accurate timing report in the static timing analysis (STA) tool [1]. Besides the high accuracy, PBA is well-known for its high runtime complexity, typically 10-1000× greater than the complexity of graph-based analysis (GBA) [2]. Due to this high complexity, PBA is very daunting to designers at the early stage of the design closure flow, even though designers appreciate PBA’s accuracy benefit.

Manuscript received 3 May 2022; revised 23 August 2022; accepted 3 October 2022. Date of publication 9 May 2023; date of current version 20 October 2023. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CCF-2126672, Grant CCF-2144523 (CAREER), and Grant OAC-2209957. This article was recommended by Associate Editor X. Li. (Corresponding author: Guannan Guo.) Guannan Guo and Sushma Yellapragada are with the Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61821 USA (e-mail: gguo4@illinois.edu). Tsung-Wei Huang is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84124 USA. Yibo Lin and Zizheng Guo are with the School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. Martin D. F. Wong is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3272274

We use Fig. 1 to illustrate the progress made by the timing literature and we want to highlight that the computational challenges of PBA remain unsolved with CPU parallelism. Current multicore CPU parallelism cannot provide groundbreaking performance improvement to PBA in the STA engines. A transformational performance milestone can only be achieved with the power of heterogeneous parallelism or CPU-graphics processing unit (GPU) hybrid computing. Nevertheless, it is extremely challenging to offload the PBA process on GPU for the following three reasons. First, PBA is graph-oriented and contains highly irregular computational patterns. We need to identify and dispatch the computation-intensive workload to CPU and throughput-intensive workload to GPU. Second, path generation process is highly dynamic, which requires specially designed GPU kernels to generate critical paths and maintain relative path priorities. Finally, to generate million of paths on million-gate designs, we need efficient and compact data structures to overcome the hurdle of limited GPU memory. In this work, we propose a novel framework that successfully resolves these challenges and accelerates PBA with transformational speed. We focus on parallelizing the core procedure, critical path generation, which takes the majority of the PBA execution time [1]. Specifically, in this procedure, we identify a set of critical paths from an updated STA graph and rank them in decreasing slack values. PBA algorithms or frameworks can then perform path-specific update on this path set. Our key contributions are listed as follows. 1) GPU-Accelerated Path Search Algorithm: We propose a new iterative path search algorithm that maximize the GPU computation throughput in each iteration. Before

1937-4151 c⃝2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 2. Example of pessimism reduction on critical paths [4].

STA requires PBA to make path-specific updates and remove unwanted pessimism. For example, common path pessimism removal (CPPR) and advanced on-chip variation (AOCV) are both common PBA workloads to achieve this objective [4]. Fig. 2 illustrates an example that PBA can reduce the absolute slack values by half with pessimism reduction on critical paths reported by GBA. For all the PBA workloads, one core routine is to generate a set of critical paths for reanalysis. This routine is very time consuming and may take hours to complete because the STA engine needs to search for critical paths from an exponential number of path candidates. Thus, the designers have emphasized that EDA vendors should seek out new parallel paradigms to boost the runtime performance of the PBA workloads [6].

III. RELATED WORKS

the iteration begins, we leverage thousands of GPU threads to construct a forest that roots at circuit datapath endpoints and unifies all path suffix informations. In the main path search iteration, different GPU threads are dispatched to alternate different critical path prefixes from the previous iteration. 2) GPU-Efficient Data Structures: To efficiently utilize the GPU memory, we maintain all explored critical paths in a dense array structure. We leverage the implicit path representation that saves each critical path in constant memory complexity. Besides, we regularly verify the number of explored path candidates and remove path candidates with low priority. In this way, we also improve the overall memory usage during the entire path search process. 3) Scalable to Large Numbers of Critical Paths: We organize the search process such that there are no shared memory conflicts between different GPU threads. The path exploration workload is determined by the path prefix. By dispatching GPU threads to different combination of path prefixes, our critical path generation process can scale to millions of paths. 4) Extensive Path Constraint Handling: Our path search algorithm can efficiently support filter kernels to remove unwanted paths that do not satisfy the given path constraints. We construct a special ranking array and a scanning array to label regions in the constrained subgraph. These two arrays act as efficient filters and maintain high data throughput for our iterative path exploration algorithm. An industrial standard timer [3] provides us the golden reference on real circuit designs to run our evaluations. We verify our timing report matches the golden reference. We use stateof-the-art path generation algorithm [4], [5] as baseline. In our experiments, we achieve up to 543× speed-up over the baseline. At the extreme case, we achieve 25×–45× faster than the baseline running on 40 CPU cores. We also prove our framework can handle extensive path constraints. We randomly select common pin sequences in full timing report and choose them as path constraints. Our algorithm can generate critical paths that fully satisfy the path constraints. Additionally, we provide several fine-grained optimizations that can further improve the performance of our framework. We believe our framework can help designers to incorporate PBA earlier in the design flow. By adopting our framework, STA engines could improve quality of results (QoR) with reasonable turnaround time.

II. PATH-BASED TIMING ANALYSIS

PBA plays a very pivotal role in STA [1]. Its goal is to remove excessive slack pessimism introduced from GBA. In STA, GBA is usually performed first to propagate the timing information across the STA graph. These timing information include slew, delay, required arrival time, and arrival time. Since these timing values are propagated under the worstcase scenario (i.e., early or late mode) [1], identified critical paths often have very pessimistic slack values. Therefore,

To alleviate the time-consuming PBA workload, there are various existing works [4], [5], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13] that seek improvement. However, their improvements are rather limited and all of them stay in the scope of CPU parallelism. For example, the state-of-the-art PBA algorithm [4], [7] proposes task-based parallelism to address the workload dependency in the STA graph, but its performance improvement stagnates at 16 cores. The PBA workload becomes more dynamic and complicated if the path constraints are considered. Works [14] and [15] improve PBA considering path constraints on CPU architectures, but their algorithms are mostly sequential and lack parallelization benefits. Recently, Guo et al. [16] proposed a new GPU-accelerated PBA algorithm that leverages GPU’s high throughput computation and boosts PBA to a new performance milestone. Additionally, Guo et al. [17] also proposed GPU-friendly preprocessing kernels to address the path constraint handling. Both works greatly accelerate the process to explore critical paths, because exploring an exponential number of paths can be highly throughput driven. GPU is built for throughputdriven applications. It has many lightweight threads to compute data vectors at one time. Multiple GPU threads can work together to compute a block of data in a single or the same instruction. However, since both works choose to mange the critical path priority on the CPU, this workload becomes the major bottleneck of the entire PBA application. To overcome

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GPU-ACCELERATED FRAMEWORK FOR PATH-BASED TIMING ANALYSIS 4221

(a)

Fig. 3. Overview of core GPU-accelerated PBA algorithm.

(b)

Fig. 4. Shortest path forest generation on GPU. (a) STA graph. (b) Shortest path forest.

this bottleneck, we propose a new framework that maintains the high path exploration throughput and manage priorities completely on GPU. Compared to the previous works, our framework completes the entire path generation process on GPU that greatly reduces the execution and communication cost on CPU.

and M edges, its CSR format requires N +2M memory. Since we need to store both the fan-in STA graph G−and fan-out STA graph G+ in CSR, the total memory requirement for two directed STA graphs is 2N + 4M.

IV. PROPOSED GPU-ACCELERATED PBA

B. Suffix Forest Construction

The flow diagram of our core GPU-accelerated PBA algorithm is shown in Fig. 3. We use an iterative approach to explore the critical path candidates. Before the main iteration begins, we unify all the path suffix information of an updated STA graph in a suffix forest. The suffix forest is essentially a shortest path forest where its roots are flip-flop inputs and primary outputs. In the main iteration, we explore new paths by alternating path prefixes with edges not belonging to the suffix forest. We denote these edges as deviation edges. We organize critical paths in levels which is equal to the number of deviation edges in the path. We increment the level for each iteration. One iteration is composed of three steps: 1) look-ahead level allocation; 2) interlevel expansion; and 3) intralevel compression. Details of each step can be referred to later sections. We can stop the iteration either when we reach the maximum level or we have sufficient critical paths for an accurate report. In the end, we will perform path recovery to generate full path trace from our implicit representation.

A. STA Graph Structure on GPU

In most STA engines, the circuit graph is modeled as a directed acyclic graph (DAG). A pin and transition combination is modeled as a vertex. A pin-to-pin connection is modeled as an edge. To make the STA graph as compact as possible, we choose the compressed sparse row (CSR) graph representation. CSR is commonly used as a condensed graph format in GPU applications [18]. It contains three linear arrays which hold information for vertex offsets, edge destinations, and edge weights, respectively. Given a directed graph with N vertices

Before we alternate path prefix for each critical path, we hold all the path suffix information in a compact data structure, suffix forest or shortest path forest. The path prefix-suffix representation has been explored in previous works [4], [5]. But instead of summarizing path suffix from all datapath endpoints, an independent shortest path tree at each endpoint is constructed regardless of overlapped regions between trees. These overlapped regions will lead to redundant tree construction, which implies high runtime and memory cost. Instead, we unify all shortest path trees into a forest that includes a predecessor array forest[N] and a distance array distances[N]. Our forest does not duplicate any vertex, which eliminates redundant construction at the same vertex. We illustrate our shortest path forest [Fig. 4(b)] in Fig. 4 given the STA graph [Fig. 4(a)]. We can observe three shortest path trees rooted at vertices J, K, and L. Their union forms the shortest path forest. We do not fully grow trees rooted at J and L to the start, because we have the tree K with smaller cumulative distances at the overlapped vertices. We can stop growing tree from root J at vertex D and stop growing tree from root L at vertex I. With this simple example, we can already demonstrate that our shortest path forest is much more compact and computation-efficient, because we save the effort to traverse the shared logic for different endpoints. Moreover, we can utilize high GPU throughput to construct our shortest path forest. Our GPU kernels are inspired by the GPU-accelerated single-source shortest path algorithm [19], [20]. In our kernel, all datapath endpoints are marked as roots or destinations. We initialize these destinations with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Algorithm 1: Distance Propagation Kernel

TABLE I Deviation Edge DATA FIELDS

Input : fan-in STA graph G−in CSR with N vertices and M edges: vertices[N], edges[M], weights[M] Input : Distance buffer, distanceBuffer[N] Input : Bitmap for recently updated vertices, bitmap[N] Result: Distances array, distances[N]

1 threadid ←blockIdx.x ∗blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

2 if threadid ≥N then

3 return;

4 end

5 if distanceBuffer[threadid] is false then

6 return;

Algorithm 2: Children Path Number Computation Kernel

7 end

8 bitmap[threadid] ←false;

9 edgeFront ←vertices[threadid];

10 edgeBack ←(threadid == N-1) ? M : vertices[threadid+1];

11 for edgeid ←edgeFront to edgeBack do

12 n ←edges[edgeid];

13 weight ←weights[edgeid];

14 newD ←distances[threadid] + weight;

Input : Fan-out STA graph G+ in CSR with N vertices and M edges, vertices[N], edges[M] Input : Suffix forest, forest[N] Input : thisLevel as current level of deviation edges Input : levelLength as the number of deviation edges in thisLevel Result: Compute path numbers originated from current level

15 atomicMin (&distanceBuffer[n], newD);

1 threadid ←blockIdx.x ∗blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

16 end

2 if threadid ≥levelLength then

17 return;

3 return;

4 end

5 v ←thisLevel[threadid].to;

6 /* Get deviation paths count originating from vertex v in the suffix forest */

7 pathCount ←getPathCount(v, vertices, edges, forest);

8 thisLevel[threadid].childOffset ←pathCount;

9 return;

required arrival time. Then we propagate the shortest distances in parallel until distances converge. Algorithm 1 shows one step of concurrent propagation. We first assigns each thread a vertex (lines 1 and 2). If the assigned vertex has received a recent update (line 5), we propagate new distances to adjacent neighbors (line 15). We finalize the distance array distances[N] if no entry in the array can be relaxed. After all shortest distances converge by running Algorithm 1, we launch another kernel that traces back edges which contribute to the shortest distance array. We recover these edges in the predecessor array forest[N]. In this way, we can quickly construct the shortest path forest because the GPU kernel updates thousands of vertices concurrently at each iteration and we launch another one-time kernel to recover the predecessor edges.

C. Look-Ahead Level Allocation

Besides level and parent that organize our data structures, we use from and to to keep track of the deviation location, childOffset to save the memory location of the children paths, and slack for the path slack value. Algorithm 2 shows the kernel to compute path count in next level to prepare for expansion. We first assign each parent deviation edge in current level with one GPU thread (lines 1 and 5). We use each thread to compute the number of child deviations (line 7) and save the number in childOffset (line 8) data field. We then launch prefix-sum kernels to obtain the correct offset. After the prefix scan, we can find the size of next level in the last offset value. This size of next level can be used for dynamic allocation. All the other offset values represent the memory locations of the children deviation edge. After prefix scan, we make sure there are zero memory access conflicts between different parent paths.

D. Interlevel Expansion

In this step, we expand children critical paths by completing their corresponding deviation edge data fields. An example of this process is shown in Fig. 5, where we expand our STA graph in Fig. 4(a) from level 0 to level 1. We use level 0 to denote the set of shortest paths, {PAEHK, PBEHK, PCFK}. An explicit representation for this path set is {e∅A, e∅B, e∅C}, where we use a leading empty set to represent a virtual edge connecting to a datapath startpoint. When we expand a parent path to its children, we pick up the last vertex deviated by the parent and walk along the suffix forest. We scan all the deviation edges in this traversal.

Before exploring new path candidates, sufficient memory should be allocated beforehand. Besides, the address of the children paths can be assigned to avoid memory collision in the later expansion step. Therefore, in this step, we compute the children path number that each parent path can expand to and perform a prefix sum computation. The result of the prefix sum can be used as row offsets for memory writing, because each path occupies a fixed size of memory. In our framework, each path is implicitly represented by one deviation edge. The deviation edges are fan-out STA graph edges not contained in our suffix forest. Since there can be a sequence of deviation edges in a path, we only use the last one to represent the full path. The path represented by the second last deviation edge is the parent critical path. We organize critical paths by counting the number of deviation edges in the path. This number is denoted as level. Paths with the same level are maintained together in a compact linear array. Therefore, we can use data fields in Table I to fully represent a critical path.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GPU-ACCELERATED FRAMEWORK FOR PATH-BASED TIMING ANALYSIS 4223

Algorithm 3: New Level Expansion Kernel

Input : Fan-out STA graph G+ in CSR with N vertices and M edges, vertices[N], edges[M], weights[M] Input : Suffix forest, forest[N] as edge array, distances[N] as distance array Input : thisLevel as current level of deviation edges Input : nextLevel as next level of deviation edges Input : levelLength as the length of current level Result: Explore children critical path candidates in next level

1 threadid ←blockIdx.x ∗blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

2 if threadid ≥levelLength then

3 return;

4 end

5 offset ←(threadid == 0) ? 0: thisLevel[threadid-1].childOffset;

6 level ←thisLevel[threadid].level;

7 slack ←thisLevel[threadid].slack;

8 v ←thisLevel[threadid].to;

Fig. 5. GPU expansion of the first level.

9 while v is not endpoint do

10 edgeFront ←vertices[v];

11 edgeBack ←(v == N-1) ? M : vertices[v+1];

12 for edgeid ←edgeFront to edgeBack do

13 n ←edges[edgeid];

14 weight ←weights[edgeid];

15 if edgeid is deviation edge then

16 /* Fill out child deviation edge data fields */

17 childPath ←nextLevel[offset];

18 childPath.level ←level+1;

19 childPath.from ←v;

These deviation edges implicitly represent the children paths. For example, if we expand parent path e∅B or PBEHK, we pick up from vertex B and walk through BEHK. Along this way, we encounter one deviation edge eHG. As shown in Fig. 5, path eHG or PBEHGJ is the only child path of parent e∅B. This expansion can run concurrently with other parent paths in the same level. For each newly expanded child path evu, the slack of child schild can be computed given the parent’s slack sparent

20 childPath.to ←n;

schild = sparent + distance(u) + weight(evu) −distance(v).

21 childPath.parent ←threadid;

22 childPath.childOffset ←0;

23 childPath.slack ←slack + distances[n] + weight - distances[v];

24 offset ←offset + 1;

25 end

26 end

27 /* Traverse along the suffix forest */

28 v = forest[v];

29 end

30 return;

As shown in Algorithm 3, we integrate the expansion rules above in our new level expansion kernel. We launch the kernel and assign each parent deviation edge to a single GPU thread (line 1). We first locate the child path starting memory location in the next level by using childOffset (lines 5, 17, and 24). Then we pick up from the last deviated vertex of the parent (line 8) and walk along the suffix forest (line 28). We collect all the deviation edges (line 15) along the way and complete the information for the children paths (line 17–23). Our kernel can maximize the throughput for children path exploration, because the memory writing locations are distinctly separated for different parent paths. Therefore, no shared memory synchronization is needed in our expansion kernel.

E. Intralevel Compression

descendant path in subsequent levels should be included in the critical paths, then all its predecessors should be included, which contradicts the assumption. Given an STA graph with vertex number N, edge number M, graph diameter d, and maximum fanout number f max out , we expand each new level in O(df max out ) times larger size. Immediately after each expansion, we sort the newly expanded level based on path slacks and keep only top k candidates, where k represents the final number of critical paths in the report. Since we can expand no more than diameter d iterations, the worst total memory complexity is O(N +M +dkf max out ). CSR graph format and final path report requires static memory O(N + M + dk). Dynamic allocation of new level requires O(dkf max out ) memory during runtime.

F. Critical Paths Recovery

After the main iteration completes, we need to recover the full path trace from the implicit deviation edge representation. The number of iterations to expand is denoted as maximum deviation level (MDL), we make MDL a tunable parameter

In each iteration, we expand a new level of critical paths based on previous critical paths. If we cascade these expansions without any restriction, we will quickly exhaust the GPU memory in a few iterations, because redundant paths in the earlier level will certainly generate more redundant children paths in the later expansion. To address the high memory consumption, we remove redundant critical paths right after each expansion so that they can no longer generate more children paths. We can prove the path removal does not impact the QoRs. Assume a path in the previous level should be removed, but some descendant path in subsequent levels should be included in the critical paths. The slack values from parent to child paths are nondescending, because the child path has one more deviation edge and each deviation edge adds a nonnegative delay value to the parent slack. Therefore, if some

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 6. Overview of preprocessing steps for path constraints handling.

to users based on different accuracy and runtime needs. To ensure no loss of accuracy, users can always set MDL as the graph diameter. As discussed in Section IV-E, slack values from path to child paths are nondescending. Even with low MDL value, we also ensure that paths with higher criticality show up in the report. To obtain the final report, we merge sorted arrays from all levels and pick k deviation edges with worst slack values. For each deviation edge in the final report, we backtrace parent until we reach the root. We collect the list of prefix edges during backtracing. Then we complement these prefix edges with suffix edges in the shortest path forest to recover the explicit path trace. For example, if we select e∅C →eCE in Fig. 5 in our report, we recover the full path trace with forest edges in Fig. 4(b) and recover the full critical path CEHK. Given STA graph diameter d and report path number k, critical path recovery only requires O(kd) time complexity, which can run fast enough on CPU. We can also use GPU to accelerate this process by assigning one thread to recover one critical path.

(a)

V. EXTENSIVE PATH CONSTRAINTS HANDLING

(b)

Fig. 7. Global ranking on GPU. (a) STA graph example. (b) Global ranking results.

to scan the STA graph. Based on scanned results, we label the constrained subgraph and perform path generation process under some filtering rules.

A. GPU-Accelerated Ranking

We implement a global ranking strategy to save the connectivity information of the STA graph. We denote the rank value as the maximum number of edges to reach one of the datapath endpoints. We allow multiple vertices to share the same rank values. Our ranking strategy preserves the property of topological orders. For any two vertices of an edge eu→v ∈E, their rank values follow the property rank(u) > rank(v). Given an STA graph in Fig. 7(a), we rank its vertices and obtain results in Fig. 7(b). We initialize all endpoints, H, I, and J, with rank value 0. Then we let rank values propagate backwards. As an example to this backward propagation, given vertex F adjacent to the endpoint I, we assign the rank value as rank(F) = 2, because the longest path to reach one of the endpoints is F →E →H instead of F →I. Algorithm 4 shows the rank propagation kernel on GPU. We launch a 2-D kernel where we assign each thread in the x-axis as a pin (line 1) and each thread in the y-axis as a transition. We choose this thread assignment because two transitions of

PBA with path constraints is very common in the STA tool, because optimization flows often invoke PBA repeatedly with different path constraints to verify correct timing behavior under certain logic cone. However, the path constraints make the search process more irregular and dynamic, which is harder to parallelize. In this section, we explain and demonstrate how our GPU-accelerated PBA framework can consider extensive path constraints by adding some key preprocessing steps. Our framework can support multiple main path constraints, which are listed as follows. 1) -max_path: The maximum number of critical paths in the timing report, which is often denoted as k. Optimization flows can control the number of paths to examine by setting this number. In this work, we experiment on a larger number of critical paths, compared to previous works that only test on k < 32 [14], [15]. 2) -from: This argument fixes the datapath starting pin or location. The argument itself can be optional. We can also pair it with an optional transition (rise or fall). 3) -through: Each occurrence of this argument specifies a pin that the critical path must pass through. If a list of this argument is given, then all reported critical paths must contain the list of pins in the same order. 4) -to: This argument fixes the datapath ending pin or location. The argument itself can be optional. We can also pair it with an optional transition. Constraints listed above are the most common and important ones which are used in the STA tools. We also support other constraint type like -split, which defines the corner (min or max). We enable our GPU-accelerated PBA framework to support these extensive constraints effectively by adding key preprocessing steps that are scalable on GPU. An overview of these preprocessing steps are shown in Fig. 6. The first preprocessing step is global ranking, where we assign each vertex with a rank value based on the vertex’s connectivity. Then we use the rank values and sequence in path constraints

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GPU-ACCELERATED FRAMEWORK FOR PATH-BASED TIMING ANALYSIS 4225

Algorithm 4: Rank Propagation Kernel

Algorithm 5: Subgraph Scanning Kernel

Input : fan-in STA graph G−in CSR with N vertices M as edges: vertices[N], edges[M], weights[M] Input : Previous rank values, ranks[N/2] Input : Rank buffer, rankBuffer[N/2] Input : Bitmap for recently updated vertices, rankUpdated[N/2] Result: Rank values array, ranks[N/2]

1 pinId ←blockIdx.x ∗blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

2 riseFall ←threadIdx.y;

Input : Fan-in STA graph G−in CSR format with N vertices and M edges, vertices[N], edges[M], weights[M] Input : Rank array, ranks[N/2] Input : Label array, labels[N] Input : Label buffer, labelBuffer[N] Input : Bitmap indicating vertices with updated labels, labelBitmap[N] Result: Finalized label array, labels[N]

3 threadid ←2*pinId + riseFall;

1 threadid ←blockIdx.x ∗blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

4 if threadid ≥N then

2 pinid ←threadid/2;

3 if threadid ≥N then

5 return;

6 end

4 return;

7 if rankUpdated[pinId] is false then

5 end

6 if labelBitmap[threadid] is false then

8 return;

9 end

7 return;

8 end

10 rankUpdated[pinId] ←false;

11 edgeFront ←vertices[threadid];

9 prevRank ←labels[threadid];

12 edgeBack ←(threadid == N-1) ? M : vertices[threadid+1];

10 labelBitmap[pinid] ←false;

13 for edgeid ←edgeFront to edgeBack do

11 edgeFront ←vertices[threadid];

14 neighborPin ←edges[edgeid]/2;

12 edgeBack ←(threadid == N-1) ? M : vertices[threadid+1];

13 for edgeid ←edgeFront to edgeBack do

15 newRank ←ranks[pinId] + 1;

16 atomicMax (&rankCache[neighborPin], newRank);

14 n ←edges[edgeid];

17 end

15 neighborPin ←n/2;

16 if ranks[neighborPin] < prevRank then

18 return;

17 labelBuffer[n] ←prevRank;

18 end

19 end

20 return;

the same pin are stored in adjacent memory locations (line 3), which can maximize memory coalescing. For all vertices with recent rank updates (line 7), we propagate their rank values plus one to their neighbors (lines 15 and 16). All the neighbors who receive new rank values will validate the update taking the maximum over its previous rank value. We increase the GPU throughput by allowing different threads writing into multiple memory locations. To ensure correctness, we enforce synchronization by using the atomic operations (line 16). In this way, atomic operations are distributed over different memory locations. This kernel introduces less thread contention compared to topological sort which relies on a single shared counter to distribute the unique value.

Fig. 8. Subgraph scanning results.

B. Constrained Subgraph Scanning

with labels 1. Similarly, we assign vertices from E up to C (not including) with labels as rank value of C. All vertices C and upward get labels INT_MAX. Since vertices G and J are not contained in the constrained subgraph, their labels remain as 0. Algorithm 5 outlines our scanning kernel. We propagate labels to the fan-in neighbors until the rank of the fan-in neighbor is less or equal to the propagated label. We assign each thread to a vertex in the STA graph (line 1). For the recently updated vertex (line 5), we propagate the label value to its fanin neighbors (line 16). We stop the propagation until the label value exceeds the rank of the same vertex (line 15). To look up the rank value of the vertex, we need to divide the vertex index by 2 to find out the pin index (lines 2 and 15), because we represent two transitions of the same pin as vertices with adjacent indices. Our kernel requires no other synchronization strategies because it involves no read-after-write operations. We can scan and label the constrained subgraph fairly quickly.

We reuse the ranking results to mark out the constrained subgraph. We mark vertices with different labels to differentiate the progress of meeting the path constraints. For high memory efficiency, we use a 1-D array labels[N] for all the label information. We define the following relationship between label and rank values. For each adjacent pins u, v in the constraints, the label value of vertex matching pin v is the rank of pin u. For instance, if -through u -fall_through v is our path constraints, we define the following rule labels[2*v+1] = rank[u]. For the first pin in the sequence of path constraints, we use the maximum integer as its label. Given the STA graph in Fig. 7(a) and path constraints -through C -through E, we obtain the scanning results in Fig. 8. For simplicity, we consider one pin as one vertex in the graph. We initialize all labels as zeros first. All the fanout pins of E (not including) get labels of the rank of last through pin. As shown in Fig. 8, we assign vertices H and I

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

constraint. We expand our prefix subforest in iterations until current set of explored paths has good enough accuracy or we explore all possible paths. By the end of iteration, we perform path recovery to obtain full paths considering all the given constraints.

VI. FINE-GRAINED OPTIMIZATIONS

Fig. 9. Assume two additional edges exist which do not affect the ranking and scanning results. Apply the filtering rules.

C. Critical Path Filtering and Searching

In this step, we generate all critical paths that satisfy the extensive path constraints. Preprocessing steps in the previous sections help us establish the rank and label information. We reuse these information to drop the paths which fail the constraints. We enable a key filtering rule and integrate it into our path expansion iteration. Different from unconstrained path generation, we only construct suffix and prefix forests in the concerned region. Therefore, we introduce the notion of suffix subforest and prefix subforest, respectively. The fan-in edge filtering rule is defined as follows: For each fan-in edge eu→v

label(u) = label(v) or rank(⌊u/2⌋) = label(v).

The proposed GPU-accelerated PBA framework can significantly reduce the long runtime of the critical path generation process. However, there is still room for improving the performance of our GPU algorithms using fine-grained optimization techniques. We highlight some performance problems of our framework below: 1) Substantial Amount of Work is Performed on the Host Side: Host handles level compression, which is essentially an indirect sorting. Profiling shows this step becomes the execution bottleneck and takes the majority of the runtime. For example, compressing over ten million path candidates into one million paths can take above 90% of the runtime in each iteration. 2) Per Thread Block Workload Needs to Synchronize With Each Other: All thread blocks needs to synchronize with each other between each step. For example, the path expansion cannot start until all thread blocks complete the offset scanning step. 3) High Communication Cost for Path Information Between Host and Device: Path information passing between host and device has a relatively high cost compared to the kernel computation. Host needs to wait for a full set of newly expanded paths for compression, which takes over 80% of the memory communication cost. Device should wait for the compressed set of paths before expanding in the next iteration. In this section, we propose several optimization techniques to overcome these performance limitations. These optimizations include kernel fusion with dynamic parallelism, finegrained workload decomposition, fast merge sort strategy, and merge with dynamic parallelism. We shall demonstrate in experimental results that our optimized framework further improved the performance of our GPU-accelerated PBA framework 3 −5× for large circuit designs.

A. Optimization Design Overview

This filtering rule considers two cases. The first case checks if edge eu→v connects two vertices in the same region. The second case checks if the edge is connected from the boundary region. Edge eu→v is permissible under constraints if it passes either one of the tests. To demonstrate the usage of our filtering rules, we illustrate an example in Fig. 9. We add two edges eD→I, eD→F that do not affect the preprocessing results. We can first remove vertices G and J since they do not belong to the constrained subgraph. Then we apply our filtering rules to each fan-in edge. For example, fan-in edge eD→I have different labels on two vertices. In other words, this fan-in edge is not connecting vertices in the same region. It also fails the second case because rank(D) ̸= label(I), meaning vertex D is not the boundary vertex before I. The diagram shows the only boundary vertex prior to I is E. We apply the same tests to fan-in edge eD→F and know it has to be filtered as well. We ignore both edges during the path generation process. While we enforce the filtering rules, we launch the distance relaxation kernel in Algorithm 1 to construct the suffix subforest. Distances of all endpoints are initialized with the required arrival time before the kernel launches. Whenever a fan-in edge connects to a neighbor, we apply the filtering rules to the fan-in edge. We stop the kernel launches until the distances converge. To collect path prefix information, we iteratively construct the prefix subforest. We still enforce the filtering rules in all the GPU kernels within each iteration. Since we explore the prefix in the other direction, we define similar filtering rule for each fan-out edge eu→v as well. In this way, we make sure the explored prefix does not violate any path

In this section, we describe the basic data structures and overview of our new framework. Fig. 10 shows the flow of our optimization techniques. Once a thread block is launched, all threads in each thread block will be assigned with four block-specific workload until we get blockwise-sorted critical paths. We assign the thread block to multiple parent deviation edges. Instead of simply assigning each thread to each parent deviation edge, we assign each thread to parent deviation edges that are evenly spaced in the memory. We leverage this thread coarsening strategy to reduce the overhead to spawn too many threads and maximize memory coalescing. After we obtain the compressed and sorted results from each thread block, we merge these results through a reduction tree strategy. We leverage CUDA dynamic parallelism to remove memory

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GPU-ACCELERATED FRAMEWORK FOR PATH-BASED TIMING ANALYSIS 4227

Listing 1. Memory allocation with dynamic parallelism.

Fig. 10. Example of new GPU-accelerated PBA framework with four thread blocks.

Listing 2. Top level kernel launch with dynamic parallelism.

management API and kernel calls on the host side. There are two places in our framework where we use dynamic parallelism. The first place is device memory allocation in kernel after the blockwise offset computation. The second place is reducing multiple sorted blocks into a single block. In the next section, we will describe specific optimizations that we have implemented in this optimized framework.

B. Optimization Strategies

Besides, threads in step expand can directly reuse the scan result in shareMem. We further reduce the number of global memory accesses as well. However, there are still some disadvantages when we fuse all kernels together with dynamic parallelism. The most important issue is the difficulty to debug. Because the kernel involves so much steps back to back, it is extremely hard to know if intermediate data are correctly computed. Besides, we need additional pointer arrays to save the device pointers allocated within the kernel for future memory management. Based on our experience, our recommendation is to implement kernels with separate steps first and make sure all steps can function correctly. Then an implementation with dynamic parallelism can be put into practice. 2) Block Merging With Dynamic Parallelism: Based on our previous optimization for blockwise merge sorting, we continue to merge sorted results in each block into a global set of worst critical paths. Because the length of sorted blocks may not be fully balanced, we want to concurrently launch different number of threads to merge two sorted blocks that is dynamically determined by the length of each block. CUDA dynamic parallelism can exactly satisfy this need. At the top level, as shown in Listing 2 we launch very few parent threads, where the total thread number equals to the number of blocks in previous fused kernel. We perform indirect sorting because sorting over the entire DeviationEdge is costly. We use the idea of structure of arrays to keep track of path slacks, intrablock indices, and interblock indices. The reason of this is to maximize the cache utilization. We will reorder the original arrays of DeviationEdge later based on deviceSortedIndices and deviceSortedGridIndices to ensure minimum times of data structure movements. At the bottom level, as shown in Listing 3, we dynamically launch children threads to merge sorted blocks in a reduction tree manner. We double stride for reduction access pattern and figure out the start and mid offsets for merging. We configure the grid dimension for each merge kernel based on

We have implemented various optimizations for our new GPU-accelerated PBA framework. We fuse multiple steps together in a single kernel to reduce the number of kernel calls on host. We implement a fast merge sort algorithm to perform the blockwise sorting workload. In the blockwise sorting, we leverage the parallel merging inspired by Kirk and Wen-Mei [21]. We reduce blockwise-sorted results by using dynamic parallelism. 1) Kernel Fusion With Dynamic Parallelism: There are four block-specific workload. To reuse threads in each block for next step’s workload, we first perform kernel fusion to steps allocate and scan, and steps expand and merge. By fusing steps allocate and scan, we compute the number of critical paths the parent path will expand, then directly save that number into shared memory, and finally perform a blockwise scan by using either Kogge and Stone [22] or Brent and Kung [23] parallel scan algorithms. By fusing steps expand and merge, we expand the child paths required by next level of path candidates, and then directly merge the expanded paths based on slack values. We effectively reduce the kernel overhead by reducing the number of necessary kernel calls. Besides, we further reduce the number of global memory accesses by converting part of the global memory access into shared memory accesses. Based on our fusion strategy above, we have successfully reduced the number of kernel calls from four to two. We can further reduce the number of kernel calls to one by using dynamic parallelism. As shown in Listing 1, after blockwise scan, we isolate a single thread for memory allocation. We first obtain the total number of child paths in next iteration for the current block. Then we use a single thread to invoke cudaMalloc to allocate proper device memory of DeviationEdge for blockwise expansion. In this way, no host operations is involved between steps scan and expand.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 11. Maximum absolute error between timing reports from our algorithm and OpenTimer.

-std=c++17 are enabled. In terms of kernel configuration, we use 1024 threads per block for 1-D kernel configurations and 256 × 2 threads per block for 2-D kernel configuration. We use one CPU core for all host operations. We consider the state-of-the-art path generation algorithm [4] as our baseline. To the best of our knowledge, the baseline has the best time complexity and practical efficiency. The baseline also supports critical path reporting with extensive path constraint. It has been implemented in the open-sourced STA tool, OpenTimer, as its core path generation algorithm [5], [24]. We evaluate our algorithm on real designs with a golden reference generated by an industrial standard timer [3]. To ensure fairness, we restrict our comparison to the PBA part in OpenTimer.

A. Path Report Accuracy

Listing 3. Bottom level kernel launch with dynamic parallelism.

number of elements per thread and number of threads per block. After these preprocessing steps, we will dynamically launch GPU merge kernel to merge two sorted blocks. We also leverage double buffering in each iteration to reduce the memory copy costs. The final merged arrays can be generated fairly quickly with dynamic parallelism because we balance the computation resources based on the size of workload.

VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Our GPU-accelerated PBA framework can generate accurate timing report. To evaluate the accuracy, we compare separate timing reports generated from our framework and the baseline on the same number of paths. We measure the absolute slack difference for each pair of critical paths in two reports. We save the maximum absolute error and plot the error versus different number of expansion levels in Fig. 11. Our experiments scale from 10 K up to 1 M critical paths on million-gate designs. We show the summary of each circuit design in Table II. As shown in Fig. 11, our algorithm outputs almost identical critical paths as OpenTimer by expanding to ten levels on all designs. We keep generating highly accurate results even for 1 M critical paths on million-gate designs leon2 (1.6 M gates), leon3mp (1.2 M gates), and netcard (1.5 M gates). Additionally, Fig. 11 manifests tremendous accuracy improvement of our algorithm in the first few levels. For example, from level 2 to level 3, the maximum absolute error in 1 M critical paths is reduced by over 1000 ps in most million-gate designs. Our report accuracy continues to improve in the subsequent level expansion. Besides slack values, we can match the full path trace between reports. After 15 deviation levels of expansion, our framework can report 1 M critical paths with the same path trace as baseline on these benchmarks.

B. Runtime Performance

In this section, we demonstrate that our GPU-accelerated framework can efficiently generate accurate path reports. Our approach is scalable to thousands and millions of paths. We conduct our experiments on a 64-bit Ubuntu Linux machine with 1 GeForce RTX 2080 GPU and 40 2-GHz Intel Xeon Gold 6138 CPU cores. Our compiler settings are CUDA NVCC 11.0 device compiler and GNU GCC 8.3.0 host compiler, where optimization flag -O2 and C++17 standard

In this section, we demonstrate our algorithm can accelerate critical path generation process to a new milestone. We compare runtime (ms) of our algorithm (one GPU) with runtime (ms) of the PBA in OpenTimer (one CPU core) by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GPU-ACCELERATED FRAMEWORK FOR PATH-BASED TIMING ANALYSIS 4229

TABLE II RUNTIME PERFORMANCE (MS) COMPARISON BETWEEN OPENTIMER AND OUR GPU-ACCELERATED ALGORITHM (ONE GPU)

Fig. 12. Speed-up values of our algorithm over the baseline at different numbers of CPU cores.

TABLE III RUNTIME PERFORMANCE (MS) CONSIDERING PATH CONSTRAINTS

reporting 100 K critical paths on the ten largest benchmarks. We experiment with MDL 10, 15, and 20, where we demonstrate the accuracy guarantee (see Section VII-C). Table II shows our results and the runtime comparison. We can observe that our algorithm achieves significant speed-up on milliongate designs over OpenTimer. With MDL equal to 15, we boost the baseline 543× on leon2 (1.6 M gates), 172× on leon3mp (1.2 M gates), and 304× on netcard (1.5 M gates). We also achieve over an order of magnitude speed-up on medium benchmarks, such as 77.9× on vga_lcd, 88.3× on vga_lcd_iccad, and 31.5× on des_perf_ispd. To further demonstrate our performance advantage over the baseline, Fig. 12 plots the speed-up curve of our algorithm over the baseline across different numbers of CPU cores. We observe that the performance of baseline continues to improve as the number of cores increases but saturates at about 16 cores. We also notice there is always a significant performance margin to ours. With the baseline at the maximum CPU concurrency of 40 cores, our algorithms is still faster than the baseline by 44.88×, 24.90×, 45.68×, and 35.27× on large designs leon2, leon2mp, netcard, and b19_iccad, respectively. In fact, according to our experiments, our GPU-accelerated PBA algorithm is always faster than the baseline in all designs, regardless of the number of CPU cores the baseline uses.

C. Runtime Performance With Path Constraints

of critical paths under various path constraints on the same set of designs. We verify that all generated critical paths meet the path constraints and the full path trace matches the baseline report. We summarizes the performance comparison in Table III. Our GPU-accelerated PBA framework is clearly faster than the baseline. Our framework demonstrates significant speed-up over the runtime performance on million-gate designs. For example, our framework is 53.7× and 102× faster than the baseline on designs leon2 and leon3mp, respectively. Our framework exhibits promising performance advantages on medium-size designs as well. For instance, our framework achieves 12×–28× speed-ups on designs vga_lcd, vga_lcd_iccad, des_perf_ispd, edit_dist_ispd, and mgc_edit_dist. We can observe

In this section, we demonstrate our GPU-accelerated PBA framework can maintain its high performance advantage when it generates critical paths under constraints. We run our framework andthebaselinetoreport arbitrarynumbers(k = 10K, 5K, 1K)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 13. Runtime comparison between OpenTimer [15] and our algorithm on different sizes of constrained subgraphs.

relatively limited speed-up in a few designs like netcard and mgc_matric_mult. This is due to highly constrained search space that limits the amount of data parallelism. We have a more in-depth discussion about the runtime performance versus size of constrained search space in the subsequent section.

D. Runtime Versus Constrained Search Space

Fig. 14. CUDA runtime and API breakdown comparison. (a) CUDA runtime and API breakdown of framework prior to optimizations. (b) CUDA runtime and API breakdown of framework after optimizations.

In this section, we discuss and analyze how the constrained subgraph size affects the runtime performance of our GPU-accelerated PBA framework when we report under path constraints. We run our framework and the baseline on designs leon2, leon3mp, netcard, b19_iccad, vga_lcd, vga_lcd_iccad, des_perf_ispd, and edit_dist_ispd under different set of path constraints. Each set of path constraints defines a different constrained subgraph. The size of the subgraph is represented by the number of pins. We plot the logarithmic runtime of our framework and the baseline versus the size of constrained subgraph in Fig. 13. In general, our framework is faster than the OpenTimer baseline at different sizes of constrained subgraph, from 4.3 K to 2.3 M. Our framework has more promising advantage on a larger constrained subgraph, because it can utilize higher data parallelism. For example, our framework has 4.61 logarithmic runtime advantage (100.5× speed-up) over the OpenTimer baseline at subgraph size of 2.3 M pins, while the advantage is much smaller for subgraphs of sizes 5.3 K–7.2 K. We can observe similar performance patterns in other designs. We revisit the netcard benchmark. Since all constrained subgraphs have sizes below 10 K, our framework can hardly benefit any data parallelism to achieve higher performance improvement.

E. Performance With Fined-Grained Optimizations

baseline. As shown in Fig. 14(a), to generate 100 K critical paths in leon2, over 90% of CUDA runtime is spent on CUDA APIs, including cudaMemcpy, cudaMalloc, cudaDeviceSynchronize, and cudaFree. Within the CUDA API, 59% runtime is spent on the memory transfer or cudaMemcpy. More specifically, due to the high volume of path candidates before compression, memory copy from device to host takes about 82%. With our optimizations, we successfully reduce this source of communication cost. The CUDA runtime breakdown after optimizations in Fig. 14(b) demonstrates this improvement. The GPU participates more in the computation since we move the compression step to the GPU. The communication cost due to memory transfer has dropped to 27%. We can also see the effectiveness of our optimization techniques by comparing the performance on the same set of circuit designs

We demonstrate our fine-grained optimizations can improve the performance of our GPU-accelerated PBA workload. We use the original GPU-accelerated PBA framework as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GPU-ACCELERATED FRAMEWORK FOR PATH-BASED TIMING ANALYSIS 4231

TABLE IV RUNTIME PERFORMANCE OF PREVIOUS GPU-ACCELERATED PBA FRAMEWORK AND OPTIMIZED FRAMEWORK

path representation method to design GPU-efficient data structures. We successfully utilize the high computation throughput for large-scale path reporting on large-scale circuit designs. We also demonstrate how we can enable guided critical path reporting with extensive path constraints. We can effectively report critical paths that satisfy path constraints while maintaining high scalability. Furthermore, we propose several fine-grained optimizations on top of this GPU-accelerated PBA framework. In this new optimized framework, we overcome the performance bottleneck in host computation and communication. Experiments show that, without further optimizations, our algorithm achieves up to 543× speed-up on an 1.6 Mgate design over the state-of-the-art PBA algorithm. At the extreme, our algorithm is 25×–45× faster than the baseline of 40 cores on million-gate designs. While reporting with path constraints, we can maintain up to 100× speed-up on milliongate design. With fine-grained optimizations, we can achieve even higher performance, about 3×–5× speed-up compared to the previous framework. We believe our algorithm can promote PBA in the earlier stage of design closure flow to improve QoR and turnaround time.

REFERENCES

used in the previous framework. We conduct the same set of experiments on 1 GeForce RTX 2080 GPU and 2-GHz Intel Xeon Gold 6138 CPU Core. We enable dynamic parallelism in NVCC by adding the compilation flag -rdc=true. A summary of experiments on the optimized framework is shown in Table IV. For each of the design circuit, we run both our framework and the baseline with expansion levels 10, 15, and 20. We first verify that our framework can correctly generate 100 K critical paths with ordered slack values. Then we document and compare the performance difference. As a comprehensive study, we also provide the peak GPU memory usage of both frameworks in the last column of Table IV. As demonstrated in Table IV, our framework can achieve 3×– 5× speed-up on large designs with over 1 million gates, such as leon2, leon3mp, netcard, and b19_iccad. To gain a better understanding of the optimized framework, we also measure the runtime breakdown in the initial iterations on leon2, since the initial iterations have the largest numbers of deviation paths. On average, we spend 42.75% on the block-specific step, 30.82% on block merging, and the rest 26.43% on CUDA API. Besides decent speed-up on large designs, we still have relatively good improvement, 1.77×– 4.70× speed-up, on the rest of medium designs. This can make a great impact to PBA acceleration, because, in leon2 for example, we can achieve 5.00× faster on top of 611× speed-up compared to state-of-the-art CPU algorithm. We also run fine-grained optimizations considering path constraints and compare with Section VII-C. With relaxed constraints in leon2 and leon3mp, we continue to obtain 3×–5× speedup. With very strict constraints in netcard, the speed-up is limited due to the tiny level of deviation edges. In this set of integrated experiments, we demonstrate that we can alleviate the performance bottleneck in previous work with our new GPU-accelerated framework.

VIII. CONCLUSION

[1] J. Bhasker et al., Static Timing Analysis for Nanometer Designs: A Practical Approach. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009. [2] T. Huang, M. Wong, D. Sinha, K. Kalafala, and N. Venkateswaran, “A distributed timing analysis framework for large designs,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE DAC, 2016, pp. 1–6. [3] J. Hu, G. Schaeffer, and V. Garg, “TAU 2015 contest on incremental timing analysis,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM ICCAD, 2015, pp. 882–889. [4] T.-W. Huang and M. D. F. Wong, “UI-Timer 1.0: An ultrafast pathbased timing analysis algorithm for CPPR,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 1862–1875, Nov. 2016. [5] T. Huang, G. Guo, C. Lin, and M. D. F. Wong, “OpenTimer V2: A new parallel incremental timing analysis engine,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 776–789, Apr. 2021. [6] “EDA vendors should improve the runtime of PBA.” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.electronicdesign.com/technologies/eda/ article/21796368 [7] T. Huang, C. Lin, G. Guo, and M. Wong, “Cpp-Taskflow: Fast taskbased parallel programming using modern C++,” in Proc. IEEE IPDPS, 2019, pp. 974–983. [8] T.-W. Huang, D.-L. Lin, C.-X. Lin, and Y. Lin, “Taskflow: A lightweight parallel and heterogeneous task graph computing system,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1303–1320, Jun. 2022.

In this article, we have introduced a novel GPU-accelerated PBA algorithm to overcome the runtime bottleneck of CPUbased PBA. We decompose the critical path generation into multiple GPU-accelerated kernels and leverage the implicit

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Yibo Lin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in microelectronics from Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, in 2018, advised by Prof. D. Z. Pan. He worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher with the University of Texas at Austin from 2018 to 2019. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, associated with the Center for Energy-Efficient Computing and Applications. His research interests include physical design, machine learning applications, emerging technology in VLSI CAD, and hardware security. Dr. Lin is a recipient of the Best Paper Awards at DAC 2019, Integration, the VLSI Journal 2018, and SPIE Advanced Lithography Conference 2016.

Zizheng Guo received the B.S. degree in computer science from Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Integrated Circuit. He is currently working on static timing analysis and power analysis problems in VLSI CAD. His research interests include data structures, algorithm design, and GPU acceleration for combinatorial optimization problems. Mr. Guo is the First Place Winner of the 2022 ACM Student Research Competition Grand Finals.

[9] C.-H. Chiu and T.-W. Huang, “Composing pipeline parallelism using control taskflow graph,” in Proc. ACM HPDC, 2022, pp. 283–284. [10] C.-H. Chiu and T.-W. Huang, “Efficient timing propagation with simultaneous structural and pipeline parallelisms: Late breaking results,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2022, pp. 1388–1389. [11] P. Lee, I. H. Jiang, and T. Chen, “FastPass: Fast timing path search for generalized timing exception handling,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM ASPDAC, 2018, pp. 172–177. [12] B. Jin, G. Luo, and W. Zhang, “A fast and accurate approach for common path pessimism removal in static timing analysis,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, 2016, pp. 2623–2626. [13] F. Peng et al., “A general graph based pessimism reduction framework for design optimization of timing closure,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE DAC, 2018, pp. 1–6. [14] K.-M. Lai, T.-W. Huang, and T.-Y. Ho, “A general cache framework for efficient generation of timing critical paths,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM DAC, 2019, pp. 1–6. [15] G. Guo, T. W. Huang, C. X. Lin, and M. Wong, “An efficient critical path generation algorithm considering extensive path constraints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM DAC, 2020, pp. 1–6. [16] G. Guo, T.-W. Huang, Y. Lin, and M. Wong, “GPU-accelerated pathbased timing analysis,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM DAC, 2021, pp. 721–726. [17] G. Guo, T.-W. Huang, Y. Lin, and W. Martin, “GPU-accelerated critical path generation with path constraints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM ICCAD, 2021, pp. 1–9. [18] N. Bell and M. Garland, “Implementing sparse matrix-vector multiplication on throughput-oriented processors,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM SC, 2009, pp. 1–11. [19] P. Harish and P. J. Narayanan, “Accelerating large graph algorithms on the GPU using CUDA,” in Proc. HiPC, 2007, pp. 197–208. [20] P. J. Martín, R. Torres, and A. Gavilanes, “CUDA solutions for the SSSP problem,” in Proc. ICCS, 2009, pp. 904–913. [21] D. B. Kirk and W. H. Wen-Mei, Programming Massively Parallel Processors: A Hands-on Approach. Boston, MA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2016. [22] P. M. Kogge and H. S. Stone, “A parallel algorithm for the efficient solution of a general class of recurrence equations,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-22, no. 8, pp. 786–793, Aug. 1973. [23] R. P. Brent and H. T. Kung, “A regular layout for parallel adders,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-31, no. 3, pp. 260–264, Mar. 1982. [24] T. Huang and M. Wong, “OpenTimer: A high-performance timing analysis tool,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM ICCAD, 2015, pp. 895–902.

Sushma Yellapragada is currently pursuing the graduate degree with the Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA, where she primarily studies high-performance computing, parallel computing, and computer architecture. She has prior experience contributing to open-source HPC technologies.

Guannan Guo received the B.S. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana– Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA, in 2017, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with research focus on circuit timing analysis, heterogeneous and parallel computing, distributed systems, and scheduling algorithms. Mr. Guo is a recipient of the Best Paper Awards at TAU 2021 Timing Workshop.

Tsung-Wei Huang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Department of Computer Science, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, in 2010 and 2011, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) Department, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA, in 2017. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the ECE Department, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. He has been researching novel software systems to streamline the building of high-performance computing applications. Dr. Huang is the recipient of the 2019 ACM/SIGDA Outstand Ph.D. Dissertation Award and the NSF CAREER Award.

Martin D. F. Wong (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in mathematics from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1979, and the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign (UIUC), Champaign, IL, USA, in 1981 and 1987, respectively. From 1987 to 2002, he was a Faculty Member of Computer Science with the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. He returned to UIUC in 2002, where he was the Executive Associate Dean from 2012 to 2018 for the College of Engineering, and the Edward C. Jordan Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He is currently the Dean of the Faculty of Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Dr. Wong is a Fellow of ACM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 16:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
